Who's next guy's going to get shipped out? And I had
to clean out about half the instructors there
before they got the idea that we were serious about
this business. And that you were going to have a
technical and not a theoretical school. And a
technical school, yeah. So that everybody was
working on a breadboard or a piece of equipment.
And so... it worked out pretty well. And would you
consider that was your main accomplishment down
in Florida? I would say that that was the main
accomplishment down there, turning it around and
making it into a practical type of school. And did
it change the quality of the student? Well,
everybody said so. So you got a man who could really
work on radar. Yeah. And it's amazing. the
individuals who had never had any responsibility
except to fly airplanes, what kind of job they
would do. I mean, they really would jump in and
really take over. So about
that time, the war was grinding down. And I went off
to be 29 in transition school. Well, at the
Florida, could you compare the size of this
school, the radio school in Sioux Falls and the
radar school in Florida? How many men did you have
under your command? Oh, the number of students at
the radar school is just about half of the number at
the radio school.
And of course, the other thing at Boca Raton,
Florida is that every time they get a commander, he
would get fired or get transferred. I had more than
a year and a half, I think, that I was there. I was
acting base commander longer than any guy that was
stationed there. What do you attribute that to?
Well, it was very, at that time it was very fluid
because the individual, the senior officers who
hadn't been overseas were being plucked out and
sent overseas to get combat time. Sure.
Why didn't they pluck you and send you off? Well, I
don't know. I was one of these individuals. Every
time the training command got a directive to
increase their training program. They always say
they could do it provided this group of officers
was retained in the training command. And I was in
that group that I was always on a list to go
overseas, but never could go overseas because
you're always increasing the training program.
Sure. And when you went on, you were instructed not
to fly on combat missions. Yeah. So when I went over
that three-month break, you couldn't even fly on a
combat mission because so many of them were
getting shot down. Exactly. One last question
before lunchtime. You didn't see combat during
the Second World War. Well, I guess two questions.
One, do you think that had an effect on your career?
And two, were you disappointed? Well, I was
disappointed. I don't think it had much to do with
your career. General Yowd, I was always chewing at
the bet to get overseas. You wrote letters to him.
General Yowd, who commanded the training
command, he would always talk to him and say, the
tanks are not going to make any difference
whatsoever when this thing is over.
And General Arnold said not to ask anymore. Yeah,
because he said you were too valuable as to what you
were doing.
But anyway, I got to Okinawa after the war was over,
or about the time the war was over, and I went into
Japan on September 11, 1945, which is only a few
days after the surrender. But it must have been
sort of disappointing for a career man not to be
able to, a career military man, not to see the
actual combat. Well. He's forgotten how
disappointing it was. When he was sent off to
England, you know, before we put in radar, he came
back and put in the radar, the first radar, excuse
me, did you tell him that? Yeah, we did. That's when
they told me not to go on any combat missions
because she had all the secrets and then he wanted
to shut down. Yeah. Radar was, of course, a great
technical advance during the Second World War,
something that the Germans and the Japanese never
got a hold of. Was there a lot of security on the
base, a lot of top secret? Oh, yeah. You had fences
around all the buildings. We wanted to go, but
there were a lot of them that didn't get to go, just
to get back around. And you had guards on the gates,
and you had passers, and that type of thing. It was
real interesting. I mean, it was fascinating,
really. While at Boca Raton,
I flew the B-17, and then I became a real proficient
radar bomber, blind bomber. on the Keys out in the
Bahamas. And that's where we were. And you had a lot
of, you sent students out, a lot of operations out
there for radar bombing? Yeah, well, see, we had,
all I would say maybe 25 bombers, either B-17s or
B-24s. And we taught the bombardiers how to
operate the equipment. And when they would give
up, I'd go down and and work on the set, see if I could
get it working. Because you get out to the Bahamas,
you're, whatever it is, an hour and a half, two
hours out there. And I got in a lot of radar bombing
myself, so it became a very, and I flew twice a week
on one of those planes. So you got your flight time
up. Yeah, well in fact I got more time in the B-17 in
one year that I flew.
at the same to me, around 300 hours. Okay,
let's stop and we'll talk about your post-war
career. Okay, this is a continuation of our
interviews, and we were talking a couple of hours
ago about your role during the Second World War as
director of first the Radio Technical School in
South Dakota and then the Radar Technical School
down in Florida.
I noticed that you were awarded the Legion of Merit
Medal for outstanding leadership,
organizational ability, and exceptionally
notorious conduct in the performance of
outstanding services. Tell me about that. I think
I've already told you all about it. Organizing
the school at Sioux Falls, South Dakota. Right. It
was because of that. It was because of the
organization. And your radar school at Boca
Raton, Florida. And then of course establishing
the various technical schools while I was at
Scott. Okay. Let's continue then with your
military career. You went to Okinawa, or out to
Japan in 1945 as subordinate commander and staff
executive of the 5th Air Force. You were there
during the McCarthy years then.
Can you tell me about General MacArthur? Well I
admired the individual. He's a very, was a very I
don't think that anyone else could have done the
same job in Japan that he did. They idolized the
emperor and so they idolized him. In fact the
Japanese I think just stole the show from us. What
do you mean? they, we'd probably, I don't know,
probably Americans if we'd been occupied, why
we'd probably,
we'd probably have bombed everybody or shoot
them, snipers, what have you. Well the Japanese
decided that, that
well Americans must have something. So they
decided to to see what we had, and they copied
everything we had. And this is quality control
now. Come in. You were saying that MacArthur was
the only one who could take care of that situation.
Well, I think that MacArthur was... Well, I'd say
egotistical enough to just fall into the Japanese
pattern. And the command, do you mean? Yeah, as a
command. And his headquarters, why every day that
he was normally left at a certain time, the
Japanese would line the streets just to take a look
at him. Really? Yeah. And I think the Japanese
figured that the Americans, to win the war over
there, must have something. So they're great
copiers. Oh, they sure are. And I'm sure that they
recognize that they're Up until that time, I
always considered Japanese products as junk. And
they produced the best cameras. They produced the
best TVs. They produced the best automobiles. I
mean, their quality control is just outstanding,
it seems to me. And of course, I spent four years in
Japan. Was MacArthur at that time your commanding
officer then? No, I was way down the line. I started
out to be in 5th Bomber Command where General Crabb
was, Jimmy Crabb was the commander and then I moved
to headquarters 5th Air Force and General Wolf was
the commander. Now he was 5th Air Force and then you
had the Far East Air Forces that was commanded by a
lieutenant general, whereas 5th Air Force was a
major general.
I was on the staff of 5th Air Force and then later I
got a command of 315th Air Division.
Did you have an opportunity to meet General
MacArthur? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. In staff meetings,
things like that? No, no. How? No, well, mostly
when you were on the staff, you were presenting
plans of some sort to General MacArthur and his
staff.
But he never inspected any of the bases at which I
was located. Most of it is more of a headquarters
type of thing. And
I was trying to think of other occasions. Most of
the other occasions were
social occasions, you know, where you attended
something that you were invited to as a senior
officer in the occupation forces. What did other
officers think of him?
Was there a general feeling? Well, I think that
there was always a general feeling of either you
were for MacArthur or you were against MacArthur.
He was a controversial type of individual where
he was always when you landed on Okinawa, he was out
there having his picture taken waving shore or
something of this sort. And I think the other thing
that MacArthur, I think he had his wife with him
almost all the time. And of course everybody
resented that type If he had his wife with him, why
couldn't everybody else have their wife with
them? What kind of relations did the occupation
army have with the Japanese people? Well, to start
with, you had practically no relations at all.
When we first went in there, you had this little
parrot type of dictionary that you
thumb through and try to get your directions. And
of course they were afraid of you. I mean when you
stopped to ask a question they would head off
across the rice paddies.
And of course they were, we went into one of the
bases there. We went in first to a big Japanese
school and took that over. Then we had a lot of
Japanese workers working on base to clean it up and
build the mess halls and this type of thing. For
your own troops? For your own troops. You were
building a military base then, right? Oh yeah. And
a training school, a technical school. And then
later on we moved up to Johnson and then all the
experienced people who were there were rotated to
the states and we got in a whole division of
infantry and they were transferred to the Air
Force and you just, they were riflemen and so you
had a bunch of warm bodies and you had to going to
change them over into airplane mechanics and this
type of thing. So again, we established some of the
same people I had in the technical schools. I went
through the records at the Far East Air Forces and
located some of my instructors and technical
officers that were in the technical schools back
in the States, picked them up, and we technical
school. We of course had lots of airplanes. They
were just destroying airplanes, American
airplanes, brand new, crushing them up and
dumping them at sea because you just didn't have
any place to keep them. Nor did you have any need for
them. So we got all kinds of airplanes, all kinds of
engines, everything we needed as far as mock-ups
are concerned, but these people work on them, so it
worked out pretty well. I was also wondering about
your feelings on dropping the atomic bomb. As far
as I was concerned, it was the right thing to do. I
mean, when you get into a situation like that, it's
either us or them. If you say, okay, we're not going
drop the atomic bomb and you lose 100,000 American
soldiers occupying Japan. It would have cost us
dearly because everything underground was just
like a beehive. It's just like when we went into
Okinawa. of all kinds of caves. They were dug in.
They were dug in. They were ready for it. As far as I
was concerned, I
feel like that's the right thing to do. You can't
look back. Did you have an opportunity to travel
much in the country? Did you get down to Nagasaki or
Hiroshima? Yeah, I visited both Nagasaki and
Hiroshima. What did you see? It was about like all
the pictures that you see. It was sometime after
when I
got down to Nagasaki and it had a zero, it had a stake
of some sort, sign or something where the zero
point where the bomb actually hit. And they just
cleaned everything up. I mean they just leveled
everything.
The firebombing did just as bad a damage, not the
Okinawa, but all the cities. The napalm bombing
made by the B-29s,
they gutted every city. They certainly did, yeah.
Killed more than the atomic bombs. That's right.
And you'd drive down the streets of almost any city
in Japan, and tin and everything else was stacked
up on the sidewalks, and you just had this one
little alley to drive down the street.
So we did a good, I mean, the Air Force did a real good
job, as far as saving American lives is concerned.
No question about that. Also during this time that
you were in Japan, 45 to 49,
the Air Force became an independent organization
shifting out of the United States Army. What were
your feelings on that as a West Point graduate?
Well, I don't know. I thought it was all right. I
jumped from a permanent captain to a permanent
colonel. when I transferred. Couldn't beat that.
Couldn't beat that at all. And I was a temporary
colonel, so I went to a permanent colonel. And then
I was on a board interviewing all the
Air Corps people and the Army people who wanted to
transfer to the Air Force as a selection board. And
so we interviewed a lot of people who wanted to
transfer. If you didn't want to transfer, you'd go
back to the Army. You didn't have to transfer to the
Air Force. In other words, enlisted men? No,
officers, mostly officers. officers who were in
the United States Army, but who had Air Force
related jobs? Jobs are, if you didn't have Air
Force related jobs. Oh, they just wanted to get
into the Air Force. Why is that? Because
promotions were obviously going to be good? Well,
I don't know, maybe some of them felt that the Air
Force was much like the Navy. I mean, they always
had a better living than the infantrymen in the
trenches. But most of them were doctors who didn't
make any difference whether or not you were in the
Army or the Air Force. Ordinance specialists
that both of us required. And personnel,
administration, any of those. And then, of
course, some of the non-rated people wanted to
become rated, and they were also transferred into
the Air Force. So what did you look for on the board?
I mean, what qualities did you look for?
What kind of man did you want to be an Air Force
officer? Well, the first thing you look at is their
shoes. I mean, you look at their personal
appearance. And it was amazing at the time that
some people would come before a board in
combat boots that had mud all over them and things
of that sort. And the guy was dressed up who was
looking sharp who answered our and all you were
trying to do is get them to talk. You really didn't
have any specific questions. What you wanted to
know is how they expressed themselves and
they were, I don't know, I can't remember a couple
of pointed questions that we'd ask them, but most
of it was just a matter of getting them to express
themselves, what their objective was in an Air
Force career and
how they looked. If they dressed up, cleanly
shaven, hair cut, shoes shined,
and under the conditions over there, a reasonably
pressed pair of pants, you normally accepted
them. And you accepted, I'd say you probably
accepted 75%.
Was there a lot of, during this time when the Air
Force was breaking away from the Army, was there a
lot of inter-service rivalry? Do you remember any
incidents of that? No, I don't.
I don't always think of an
incident where the Army, when I commanded the
315th Air Division, my division commander's wife
was at the commissary and my wife was standing in
line to check out while she waltzes right through
ahead of everybody and apparently the guy on the
check out counter says, well that's Mrs.
Hetherington back there. She's the wife of the
3853rd Division Commander and apparently Mrs.
Blanchard. I said, well, I don't care. But that's
about the only instance I can remember. But
no, I mean, you had,
there wasn't really, as far as I was concerned,
there really wasn't a lot of, and you really didn't
have that much contact with them. Because you
played them, each division had their own football
team. Sure. and you played them, so there's a lot of
rivalry as far as football was concerned, but
there's a lot of rivalry between this Army
division and another one, the 8th Cavalry and
somebody else. But in the colonel ranks of Army
people or Navy people over there, people got
along. Oh yeah, see everybody was promoted. Like
in my class of 33, everybody was promoted at the
same time. I was promoted to first lieutenant and
then I was promoted to captain. All my classmates
were promoted to captain at the same time. and same
thing the Majors, same thing the Lieutenant
Colonel. And then after that it was a selection
process whether or not you were overseas in combat
where your chances of getting promoted head kind
of a field promotion was greater than you were if
you were working back in the States. But
about every six months I got promoted.
There was another aspect during the Truman
administration. Not only did he take the Air Force
and change the Department of Defense, or
establish the Department of Defense, but also he
had an executive order in 1948 that integrated the
services. Do you remember if that had any, do you
remember when the first Air Force units when you
were in Japan were integrated?
No, we didn't have,
it just wasn't that many colored troops that were
available to, to,
in fact I don't,
I don't, I don't think we had to pop it off. I mean I
don't, I don't think we got a single colored pilot
or what have you. It took, well I'll say it, when I
commanded Massawa a long time later, why did you
have a really integrated command?
And I would say after graduating from the Air War
College and commanding the security service, you
had a few colored troops, but not very many. So you
didn't get any... It really wasn't a problem.
Okay, okay. Now let's talk about your command of
the 315th Wing. What were your functions and
duties there? Well, I had... I think about four
bases underneath me. I had a 38th bomb wing and I had
an 8th fighter group and I had an air command, an
ACNW outfit, that's the air command and warning
system.
I would say the biggest problem I had there was that
I was junior to a lot of colonels. You mean you were a
lieutenant colonel? No, I was junior in grade as
far as seniority was concerned. And
those guys, I figured they gave me trouble all the
time. Oh, they did? Well, they didn't really
support you like they would have if they'd been
junior to you. So other commanders of other wings,
then, in other words, the relationship between
you and other commanders wasn't very good because
they received— Well, I commanded 315th, and then I
had the
commander of Inazuki Base. was senior to me and the
commander of the 38th bomb group was senior to me.
And then the 8th fire group commander was junior to
me. And I think I had three colonels that were
commanders. And I was designated commander by the
election of the president. And of course, I think
your biggest problem in those conditions is
trying to be a nice guy rather than really clamping
down. And
either insisting that they do what you want them
to, and want it done, and want things done, or quit.
One of them got to drinking too much.